## Scalability

how to scale an application so that it can be used by millions of people

### horizontal vs vertical scaling

#### single server design

single point of failure - when server or database fails nothing works

client => server => database

#### vertical scaling

client => bigger fat server => bigger fat database

still a single point of failure - when server or database fails nothing works

#### horizontal scaling

client => load balancer => multiple servers => database

the frontend will be keep on serving since we have multiple servers and if one failed, load balancer knows it and that reroutes it to different server

this is easier if the web servers are stateless, ie it does not depend on the previous request. server can handle any request at any time.

Database

### vertical scaling

Cold standby

till now we were using a single database and this can be a single point failure as well. during that time we have standby database which needs to be filled with periodic backup and then can be used as a main db. this may take time to do it since filling the backup can also take time. so not the best if we are using the client facing system

Warm standby

Always takes the copy to the another database constantly(replication). so once the main db failed we switch to the other one.

Hot standby

writing the same data simultaneously to another db.

### horizontal scaling

sharding ?

Denormalization ?

### Data lake

throw data into text files eg json, csv into a big distributed storage like amazon s3

### Acid compliance

1. atomicity - either the entire transaction succeeds or the entire thing fails
2. consistency - all databases rules are enforced or the entire transaction is rolled back
3. isolation - no transaction is affected by any other transaction that is still in progress
4. durability - once a transaction is committed, it stays even if the system crashes immediately after

### CAP Theorem

using cap to select a database
select any of the 2

1. availability
2. consistency
3. partition tolerance

mysql provides: availability, consistency
casandra provides: availability,partition tolerance
mongodb provides: consistency and partition tolerance

## Caching

client => load balancer => multiple servers => caching layer =>database

client => load balancer => multiple servers => caching servers =>database

1. horizontally scaled servers
2. appropriate for the application with more reads than writes
3. expiration policy dictates how long the data is cached
4. cold start is also a problem,how do you initially warm up the cache?

eviction policies in caching

1. LRU - least recently used
2. LFU - least frequetly used
3. FIFO - first in first out

caching technologies

1. memcached - key value
2. redis - adds more features
3. Ncache
4. Ehcache
5. elasticache - aws cloud based solution - fully managed redis or memcached

## CDN- content delivery network

client => CDN => load balancer => multiple servers => caching servers =>database
geographically distributed
mainly useful for static content
eg aws cloudfront, azure cdn,akamai,cloudflare,googlecdn

## resilency

when you are about to build a massive system we need to see what can go wrong

1. single server
2. entire data center(availability zone)
3. entire region

client =>geo routing => multiple load balancer => multiple servers => caching servers =>database

make sure your system has enough capacity to survive a failure, this is overprovisioning

## Message queues as a scaling tool

## Cloud computing

### Azure

- storage - Blob
- compute - virtual machine
- nosql - cosmos db
- containers - kubernetes - AWS, Google, and Azure all offer Kubernetes as a service. It is a tool for packaging and deploying self-contained systems across many servers.
- datawarehouse - azure sql
- caching - redis

## System design - 1. Youtube

- think out loud
- what all modules should we cover?
- do we need a search engine for the user to search for
- do we need to display tons of videos to the user
- how many users are we considering 100? millions? vertical scalling or horizontal scaling
- latency requirements:how fast is fast enough which tells us to use CDN and caching usage
- availability requirements:how much downtime can you tolerate? what happens when the system goes down?
- what happens if we have a sudden surge in traffic
- what happens if a region is down
- how would you make it better? how to optimize

## System design - 2. URL shortening service

- are we talking about bit.ly
- a service where anyone can enter a url-use a shorter url in place and we manage redirecting them
- what sort of scaling - we dont want to limit the users at later point in time ? horizontal scaling
- what should the url characters can contain?symbols will be hard to remember and type?
  how long the url can be? 6 characters?
- how about vanity urls ?people can type their own url if it is available.?
- how long the shortened urls last for?forever?
- do we need to let the user to edit or delete urls once created?only when they are signed in and if they have created it ?

- 301 will allow you cache 302 wont allow to cache and have to hit server each time

## System design - 3. Restaurant reservation service

- whether its for single restaurant or for many like a open table
- user will want to select a restaurant? enter their party size?available times, lock in the reservation, get sms via confirmation, also need to edit or cancel the reservations
- whether it should be fast in performance and reliable? if money is not a problem?
- a way to setup how many tables and their configuration?
- normalised vs denormalised table

## System design - 4. web crawler

- entire web, billions of page
- need to crawled once in a week
- need to updated when we rerun and if there is any changes
- do we need to images as well?
- what is the main purpose of this web crawler? search engine

## System design - 5.search engine

- is it for the entire web or just an intranet tool
- generating reasonable search?
