## Python

Python is a high level general-purpose programming language. It uses a multi-paradigm approach, meaning it supports procedural, object-oriented, and some functional programming constructs.

### programming language: python

1. set of instruction to the computer
2. but computers understand only 1 and 0
3. we need a translator(compiler or intrepreter) that converts the source code to binary(0,1)
4. compiler executes the whole source code file to a binary file at once.
5. interpreter interprets line by line and executes it before it goes to the next line.
6. python is written in C (cpython which is the interpreter)
7. python code => taken by interpreter(cpython) => converts to byte code(0,1) => taken by cpython VM and executed in the system.
8. code editors: visual studio code
9. IDEs: pycharm,spyder
10. notebooks: jupyter
11. repl.it(without installing anything we can work with python)
12. python creator guido van rossum
13. python3 --version

## Python datatypes

1. int
2. float
3. bool
4. str
5. list
6. dict
7. set
8. tuple
9. we can create custom types
10. none

## methods

1. bin(5) // converts to a binary no
2. int('0b101',2) // converts to a integer no
3. type('hi') // gives str
4. str(100) // converts to string
5. int('100') // converts to integer
6. input('enter your age') // get inputs from the user and inputs will be in string, so be careful so that you take the correct value out of it(convert to integer).

## variables

1. variables should be written in snake_case.
2. iq=190 // this is how variable is defined
3. PI=3.14 // to declare constants
4. a,b,c=1,2,3 // way to assign value to variable

## expression

a piece of code that evaluates to a value

## statement

a single line of code (ie) a=10 // statement

## string

1. we can use ''' ''' to type long text with multiple lines and print it

## list

list slicing ?TODO

sampleList=[a,b,c,d]

b = sampleList[:] # list copying is happening, 2 distinct object with 2 different reference for a and b.

- list have an order - when to use a list
- when the above list copying is done it has 2 different reference
- returns new list each time
- len(a) returns 4
- sampleList.append(5) # adds a new element to the end of sampleList
- insert will add to any index
- extend merges 2 arrays. sampleList.extend([x,z]). sampleList=[a,b,c,d,x,z]
- pop deletes element at the end , as well as any index and returns the element which is deleted
- remove removes the element based on the value in the list sampleList.remove(z) then if we print sampleList will print [a,b,c,d,x]
- clear removes all the element from the list
- print('a' in sampleList) returns true or false # to check if the element exists
- sampleList.sort() sorts the sampleList
- sorted(sampleList) returns the sorted new list and wont modify the sampleList
- sampleList.reverse() reverses the list
- ' '.join(sampleList) => a b c d
- list unpacking:

```
  a,b, *rest = sampleList
  a will have value 'a'
  b will have value 'b'
  rest will have remaining
```

## Dictionary or dict

```
dictionary ={
   a: 1,
   b: 'a'
}

print(dictionary['a'])
```

- dict dont have an order, when to use an dict
- dict should have a unique key
- print('a' in dictionary.keys()) # to check if key exists
- print(1 in dictionary.values()) # to check if value exists
- print(1 in dictionary.values()) # to check if value exists
- dictionary.items() returns all the values of the dictionary
- dictionary.clear() removes all the values
- dictionary.copy() returns a new object with different reference
- dictionary.update({c: 'abc'}) will update the existing dict

## Tuple

```
myTuple =(1,2,3,4,5)
```

- immutable
- we cannot reassign
- if we dont want to change then use tuple instead of list
- len(myTuple)

## Set

```
my_set={1,2,3}
new_set={2,3,4}
```

- unordered unique objects
- my_set.add(6) # to add an element
- list(my_set)
- my_set.copy() creates new set with different reference
- my_set.difference(new_set) returns the difference # returns {1}
- my_set.discards(2) discards 2 from my_set
- my_set.intersection(new_set) returns what is common
- my_set.isdisjoint(new_set) returns true if they dont have anything in common
- my_set.union(new_set) returns all the unique minus the common ones
- my_set.issubset(new_set) to find if all items in my_set exist within new_set
- my_set.issuperset(new_set) to find if my_set is superset of new_set

## Ternary operator

```
is_friend = False
can_message = "message allowed" if isFriend else "message not allowed"
print(can_message)
```

## is vs ==

True is True # checks the memory reference
true == true # checks the value

## iterable

iterable is list,set,tuple,string,dict which can be iterated

## range

range returns an object which can be iterable

```
for _ in range(5)
   print(_)
   #prints 0 to 4,_ acts as a variable

```

## enumerate

```
for i,x in enumerate([1,2,3])
print(i,x) # i prints index and x prints value

```

## function

```
def sayhello(name): # parameter
   print(f'hi {name}')

sayhello('Dias') # argument
```

## methods vs function

- the above sayhello is a function
- 'abc'.capitalize() is a method

## docstrings

```
def sayhello(name):
   #display name of the user # this the docstring
   print(f'hi {name}')
   sayhello('Dias')
   print(sayhello.__doc__) #prints the docstring
```

## \*args vs kwargs

arguments vs keyword arguments

```
def sum(*args):
print(sum(args))

sum(1,2,3,4, num=7,num2=9)
```

## walrus operator

```
a='jhbjkhlkjn'

if((n := len(a))>5):
   print(f"the length of the value is {n} elements") # dont want to find the length twice

```

## global scope vs nolocal scope

## object oriented programming

1. class is blueprint
2. we instantiate to create an object
3. creating object : player1 = Player()
4. once an object is created `__init__()` gets called automatically to set default values
5. set the attributes with self.age = age, that exist in the object level
6. @classmethod we have extra argument as cls like we have self for normal methods. can be accessed as Player.methodname() without instantiating the class
7. @staticmethod we dont have cls or self
8. private variables should be written as self.\_age
9. using super()we can call the init method from the parent class

## encapsulation

1. encapsulating attributes and methods into a single entity

## abstraction

hiding of information that is not necessary and extracting what is necessary. eg len([2,3,6])

## inheritance

- inheriting from the parent class so that we can keep the methods dry
- all classes inherits from the base class object
- all dunder methods comes from the object class

## polymorphism

- many forms
- having same method in different classes

## dunder methods

```
- __str__() dunder methods which we can customize to formatted text
- __call__()
- __len__()
- __getItem__()
```

## multiple inheritance

- inheriting from multiple classes

## MRO (method resolution order)

## Functional programming

### pure function

1. when we give an input to the function, the same output is obtained each time
2. there will be no side effects?

### map , filter, reduce, zip

```

print(list(map(function,data)))

print(list(filter(function,data)))

print(list(zip([1,2,3],[5,6,7]))) #[(1,5),(2,6),(3,7)]
```

### lambda function- anonymous function- executed only once

lambda argument: function expression

```
print(list(map(lambda item: item*2,[1,2,3])))
```

### list comprehension

creates a list in a short hand way

```
myList =[char for char in 'hello']
myList = [num for num in range(1,100)]
myList = [num*2 for num in range(1,100)]
myList = [num**2 for num in range(1,100) if num % 2==0]

set comprehension

myList ={char for char in 'hello'}
myList = {num for num in range(1,100)}
myList = {num*2 for num in range(1,100)}
myList = {num**2 for num in range(1,100) if num % 2==0}

dictionary comprhension

simple_dict={'a':1,'b':2}
my_dict = {k:v**2 for k,v in simple_dict.items() if v%2==0}

```

## decorators

- @staticmethod adds extra power to the function
- we can create our own

## higher order function HOC

- function which accepts a function as a parameter
- function which returns a function is said to be HOC

## exception handling

```

try:
   age: int(input('Enter you age'))
   10/age
except ValueError:
   print('please enter a number')
   continue
except ZeroDivisionError:
   print('please enter a number')
   break
else:
   print('thank you')
finally:
   print('ok i am finally done')
print('can you hear me')
```

## generators

- range is generator function
- it will performant using a generator function
- it takes one input at a time so that so that it dont takes more space in the memory

## File I/O

```
myfile = open('test.txt')
print(myfile.read())

# standard way to work with files in python

with open('test.txt', mode='a') as my_file:
   print(my_file.readlines())
   print(my_file.write(':)'))
```

pathlib module is compatible with both unix and windows based paths

```
try
   with open('test.txt', mode='a') as my_file:
   print(my_file.readlines())
except FileNotFoundError as err:
   print('file does not exist')
   raise err
except IOError as err:
   print('IO error')
   raise err
```

## Testing

- unittest package can be used for testing

```

main.py

def do_stuff(num):
   try:
      return int(num) + 5
   except ValueError as err:
      return err

test.py

import unittest
import main

class TestMain(unittest.TestCase)

   def setup():
      print('about to run test')

   def test_do_stuff(self):
      test_param = 10
      result = main.do_stuff(test_param)
      self.assertEqual(result,15)

   def teardown():
      print('cleaning up')


if __name__ == '__main__'
   unittest.main()
```

## usage

1. pillow package can be used to work with images
2. pypdf2- merge pdfs/watermark
3. smtplib - send emails
4. beautifulsoup4 - used to scrape websites
5. scrapy - is the big one for larger websites- https://news.ycombinator.com/

## merge pdf

```
import pypdf2
import sys

inputs = sys.argv[1:]

def mergepdf(pdf_list):
   merger = pypdf2.pdffilemerger()
   for pdf in pdf_list:
      merger.append(pdf)
   merger.write(super.pdf)

mergedpf(inputs)
```

## scrape webpage

```
import requests
from bs4 import beautifulSoup

res = requests.get('https://news.ycombinator.com/')
print(res.text)

soup = BeautifulSoup(res.text, 'html.parser')
print(soup.body.contents)
print(soup.find('div'))
```

## web development with python

- python has a http server - only for development purpose
- python3 -m venv venv
- to activate

```
Command to activate virtual environment


bash/zsh

$ source <venv>/bin/activate

PowerShell

$ <venv>/bin/Activate.ps1

Windows

cmd.exe

C:\> <venv>\Scripts\activate.bat

PowerShell

PS C:\> <venv>\Scripts\Activate.ps1


```

- pip install flask
- to continuously detect the changes we need to set the FLASK_ENV variable to development and it will run in debug mode
- text/html, application/json
- radio button if we have many and we need to group them into one we need to give the name property for all the radio button
- if we add an input element and provide a name property and when we click submit type button the values of the input will be appended in the url when the form method is get, that is called query string parameters
- when the method is post the input will be passed in the body
- you can add a text file and save the details of the form instead of db \*\*\*very important point

## submit data to file(Email form submission)

```

def write_to_file(data):
   with open('database.txt', mode='a') as database:
      email=data['email']
      subject=data['subject']
      message=['message']
      file = database.write(f'{email},{subject},{message}')

def write_to_csv(data):
   with open('database.csv', newline='', mode='a') as database2:
      check this how to do?

def submit():
   if request.method == 'POST':
      data = request.form.to_dict()
      write_to_file(data)
      return redirect('thankyou.html')
   else
      return 'something went wrong'


```

## Databases

- sql is the language through which we query rdbms

## Machine learning

- import the data
- clean the data
- split the data (training set/test set)
- create a model
- check the output
- improve

tools used

- numpy - working with list and arrays
- pandas - working with tabular data ie csv
- sci-kit-learn - for choosing different algorithm
- matplotlib,seaborn - visualising data
- jupitar notebooks - by installing anaconda we get jupitar notebooks
- kaggle - is where we get data, sample data, jupitar notebooks

## Notes

1. formatted strings === format() // used for same purpose prefer print(f"Hi {firstname}")
2. print(array[0:len(array)]) // to retrieve particular values
3. input("") // to get input from user
4. list is similar to array, array.append to add additional value, array.sort to sort the array,array.pop to delete an element
5. set does not allow duplicate values {1,2,4,1}
   print({1,2,4,1}) //will print 124
6. how to create virtual environment
   `python -m venv fastapienv`
   `fastapienv/Scripts/activate.bat`
7. install pylint for syntax checking
8. formatter using pep 8 document(format document)
9. a python file said to be a module and a folder is said to be a package which has a init.py file
10. ways to import: from package import modulename

11. executing a block code in main file, this executes only in the main file, in the main file u get the value of `__name__ as __main__`

```
   if __name__ == '__main__'
      print('execute this line')


```

12. python module index - to check the builtin modules in python , random
13. python package index - to check 3party packages
14. installing packages - pip3 install pyjokes/ pip3 uninstall pyjokes
15. useful modules - collections, datetime, array
16. pdb package will help in debugging # add pdb.set_traces() where you need to debug and type the variable for which you need to check the value
17. ./ current directory
18. re package can be used to regular expression, for searching some pattern
19. pip freeze > requirements.txt # to get the packages of the current project which we are using
20. pythonanywhere to host a project for free

## Points

1. It can work with any client-side framework, and can deliver content in almost any format (including HTML, RSS feeds, JSON, and XML).

2. Django enables protection against many vulnerabilities by default, including SQL injection, cross-site scripting, cross-site request forgery and clickjacking (see Website security for more details of such attacks).

3. As a result, experienced Python/Django developers typically run Python apps within independent Python virtual environments. This enables multiple different Django environments on a single computer. The Django developer team itself recommends that you use Python virtual environments!

4. Experienced Python developers may install additional tools, such as linters (which help detect common errors in code).

Note that you should use a Django-aware linter such as pylint-django, because some common Python linters (such as pylint) incorrectly report errors in the standard files generated for Django.

```

```
